# 1.2 Classification of optimization models
<div align='justify'>
Optimization models can be classified depending on the point of view we adopt.
</div>

## 1.2.1 Time periods
<div align="justify">
When optimization models are classified through the <b>number of time periods considered</b>, it can be classified as:
  <br><br>
  <ol>
    <li>Static (single time period)</li>
    All decisions are made <b>at one point in time</b>, where there are no future or past interaction.<br><br>
    For example, one-time routing in logistics, or one-day production in factories.<br><br>
    <li>Multistage (multiple time period)</li>
    Decisions are made <b>across multiple time periods.</b>, where the system has a <b>state that evolves over time.</b> The current decisions affect future outcomes.<br><br>
    For example, delivery routing over days, energy planning<br><br>
  </ol>
</div>

## 1.2.2 Behavior of parameters
<div align="justify">
When optimization models are classified through the <b>behavior of the parameters of the model</b>, it can be classified as:
  <br><br>
  <ol>
    <li>Deterministic</li>
    Parameters are <b>known constants</b>.<br><br>
    <li>Stochastic</li>
    Parameters are specified as <b>uncertain quantities,</b> whose values are characterized by probability distributions.<br><br>
    <li>Parametric</li>
    <b>Some of the parameters</b> are allowed to <b>vary systematically (changing parameters in a controlled way),</b> and the <b>changes in the optimum solution</b> corresponding to changes in those parameters are <b>determined.</b> This means every systematic change made to a parameter, the optimization problem is resolved to find the new optimal solution, tracking how the optimal plan evolves.<br><br>
  </ol>
</div>

## 1.2.3 Behavior of variables
<div align="justify">
When optimization models are classified through the <b>behavior of the variables in the optimal solution</b>, it can be classified as:
  <br><br>
  <ol>
    <li>Continuous</li>
    Variables are allowed to take <b>any value</b> that satisfies the constraints.<br><br>
    <li>Discrete / Integer</li>
    Variables are allowed to take on <b>only discrete values</b>.<br><br>
    <li>Mixed</li>
    The problem has <b>some integer</b> variables and <b>some continuous</b> variables<br><br>
  </ol>
</div>

## 1.2.4 Conclusion
<div align="justify">
  Optimization models can be classified based on time periods, parameter behavior, and variable types. These classifications help us understand how decisions are made, how uncertainty is handled, and the nature of the variables involved. Overall, they provide a structured way to model real-world problems and choose appropriate solution methods. 
</div>
