# 2.0 Introduction to Simplex method
<div align='justify'>
  Simplex method, a systematic procedure for solving linear programs. It proceeds by <b>moving from one feasible solution to another, improving the value of the objective function at each step,</b> and finally terminating after a finite number of such transitions.<br><br>

  The simplex method has three characteristics:
  <ol>
    <li>Robust</li>
    It detects redundant constraints, identifies unbounded objective value, and solves problems with one or more optimal solution.<br><br>
    <li>Self-initiating</li>
    It uses itself to either generate an appropriate feasible solution, or to show that the problem has no feasible solution.<br><br>
    <li>Shows more than just optimal solutions</li>
    Its byproducts can indicate how optimal solution varies as a function of the problem data (cost efficients, constraint coefficients, and righthand-side data).
  </ol><br><br>

  Before learning how to solve with simplex method, it is important to understand certain prerequisite knowledge.
### Canonical form
Consider the following example linear program:
<table align='center'>
  <tr>
    <td>
      <div align="center">
        Maximize z = 0x<sub>1</sub> + 0x<sub>2</sub> - 3x<sub>3</sub> - 4x<sub>4</sub> +20 (objective 1),
      </div>
      <div align="justify">
        Subject to:
      </div>
      <div align="center">
        x<sub>1</sub> - 3x<sub>3</sub> + 3x<sub>4</sub> = 6, (constraint 1)<br>
        x<sub>2</sub> - 8x<sub>3</sub> + 4x<sub>4</sub> = 4, (constraint 2)<br>
        x<sub>j</sub> (j=1,2,3,4) ≥0 (nonnegative constraint)
      </div>
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>
  <br>
  This problem is said to be <b>in canonical form has the following characteristics</b>:
  <ol>
    <li>All <b>decision variables</b> are constrained to be <b>nonnegative.</b></li><br>
      x<sub>j</sub>≥0 (j=1,2,3,4) (nonnegative constraint)<br><br>
    <li><b>All constraints, except</b> for the <b>nonnegativity</b> of decision variables, are stated as <b>equalities.</b></li><br>
      Constraint 1 and 2 both have '=' sign instead of '≥' and '≤' signs.<br><br>
    <li>The <b>righthand-side</b> coefficients are all <b>nonnegative.</b></li><br>
      Constraint 1 and 2 has righthand-side coefficients of 6 and 4 respectively, both ≥0.<br><br>
    <li><b>One decision variable</b> is <b>isolated in each constraint with a "+1" coefficient.</b> The variable isolated in a given constraint <b>does not appear in any other constraint,</b> and has <b>zero coefficient in the objective function.</b></li><br>
      x<sub>1</sub> in constraint 1 and x<sub>2</sub> in constraint 2 are isolated with "+1" coefficient, they do not appear in other constraints and both have "0" coefficient in objective 1.<br><br>    
  </ol>

## 2.0.1 Optimality Criterion
Using the previous example,
<table align='center'>
  <tr>
    <td>
      <div align="center">
        Maximize z = 0x<sub>1</sub> + 0x<sub>2</sub> - 3x<sub>3</sub> - 4x<sub>4</sub> +20 (objective 1),
      </div>
      <div align="justify">
        Subject to:
      </div>
      <div align="center">
        x<sub>1</sub> - 3x<sub>3</sub> + 3x<sub>4</sub> = 6, (constraint 1)<br>
        x<sub>2</sub> - 8x<sub>3</sub> + 4x<sub>4</sub> = 4, (constraint 2)<br>
        x<sub>j</sub> (j=1,2,3,4) ≥0 (nonnegative constraint)
      </div>
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>
<div align='justify'>
  Observe that, in canonical form, <b>setting x<sub>3</sub> = x<sub>4</sub> = 0</b> immediately gives a <b>feasible solution with x<sub>1</sub> = 6 and x<sub>2</sub> = 4.</b> Solutions like these are known as <b>basic feasible solutions</b>.<br><br>
  There are two types of variables present:
  <ol>
    <li>Basic variable</li>
    Isolated variables that are solved by making them <b>equal to the righthand side constraint.</b> (x<sub>1</sub>, x<sub>2</sub>)<br><br>
    <li>Nonbasic variable</li>
    <b>Variables that are set to zero</b> so basic variables equal to the righthand side constraint. (x<sub>3</sub>, x<sub>4</sub>)<br><br>
  </ol>
  In general, given a <b>canonical form for any linear program,</b> a <b>basic feasible solution</b> is given by setting the <b>nonbasic variables to zero,</b> and setting the <b>basic variables equal to the righthand side value.</b><br><br>
  Also observe that for any other feasible solution, x<sub>3</sub> and x<sub>4</sub> (nonbasic variables) must remain nonnegative due to the nonnegative constraint. Since their <b>coefficients in the objective function are negative</b>, either x<sub>3</sub> or x<sub>4</sub> being positive will make z<20. Thus, the optimal solution is when x<sub>3</sub> = x<sub>4</sub> = 0. This gives the <b>Optimality Criterion.</b><br><br>
    <table align='center'>
      <tr>
        <td>
          <div align='center'>
            <b>Optimality Criterion</b><br>
          </div>
          <div align='justify'>
            Suppose that, in a <b>maximization problem</b>, <b>every nonbasic variable</b> has a <b>non-positive coefficient</b> in the <b>objective function</b> of a <b>canonical form.</b> Then the <b>basic feasible solution</b> given by the canonical form <b>maximizes the objective function</b> over the feasible region.
          </div>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </table
</div>

## 2.0.2 Unboundedness Criterion
