# 2.1 Reduction to Canonical form
<div align='justify'>
  In 2.0 Simplex method introduction, we discussed about canonical form, but why do we need it? Canonical form is important in the simplex method as it offers <b>simplification, efficiency, </b> provides a <b>unified framework</b> for solving optimization problem, and it helps identify the <b>basic feasible solution.</b><br><br>

  In this section, we will have a look on <b>how to reduce a problem into canonical form.</b>
</div>

## 2.1.1 Slack and surplus variable
<div align='justify'>
  Recall that in canonical form description point 2, "<b>All constraints, except</b> for the <b>nonnegativity</b> of decision variables, are stated as <b>equalities.</b>" In order to <b>change from inequalities into equalities,</b> we have to <b>add in new variables.</b> Consider the example below:<br><br>
  <div align='center'>
    40x<sub>1</sub> + 10x<sub>2</sub> + 6x<sub>3</sub> ≤ 55.0<br>
    40x<sub>1</sub> + 10x<sub>2</sub> + 6x<sub>3</sub> ≥ 32.5
  </div><br>
  To convert these constraints to equality form, we introduce two new <b>nonnegative variables</b> defined as:<br><br>
  <div align='center'>
    x<sub>5</sub> = 55.0 - 40x<sub>1</sub> - 10x<sub>2</sub> - 6x<sub>3</sub><br>
    x<sub>6</sub> = 40x<sub>1</sub> + 10x<sub>2</sub> + 6x<sub>3</sub> - 32.5
  </div><br>
  Where x<sub>5</sub> is called a <b>slack variable,</b> measuring the <b>amount falling short of the maximum content</b> (as it is ≤ 55 in this case), while x<sub>6</sub> is called a <b>surplus variable,</b> measuring the <b>amount in excess of the minimum requirement</b> (as it is ≥ 32.5 in this case)<br><br>
  The constraints are now in equality form:<br><br>
  <div align='center'>
    40x<sub>1</sub> + 10x<sub>2</sub> + 6x<sub>3</sub> <b>+ x<sub>5</sub></b> = 55.0<br>
    40x<sub>1</sub> + 10x<sub>2</sub> + 6x<sub>3</sub> <b>- x<sub>6</sub></b> = 32.5
  </div><br>
  So to sum it up, add <b>slack variable (+ nonnegative variable) for "≤"</b> inequality and <b>surplus variable (- nonnegative variable) for "≥"</b> inequality.<br><br>
  Canonical form description point 4 states that "<b>One decision variable</b> is <b>isolated</b> in each constraint with <b>a "+1" coefficient.</b>".<br><br>
  For <b>slack variable</b>, its coefficient is "+1", making the equation a <b>canonical equation.</b> However, <b>surplus variable</b> has a "-1" coefficient, so the equation is <b>NOT a canonical equation</b>. To deal with that, we have to use <b>artificial variables.</b>
</div>

## 2.1.2 Artificial variables
<div align='justify'>
  From the example before,<br><br>
  <div align='center'>
    40x<sub>1</sub> + 10x<sub>2</sub> + 6x<sub>3</sub> + x<sub>5</sub> = 55.0<br>
    40x<sub>1</sub> + 10x<sub>2</sub> + 6x<sub>3</sub> - x<sub>6</sub> = 32.5
  </div><br>
  Equation with x<sub>5</sub> is in canonical form but the one with x<sub>6</sub> is not. To make it canonical, we need to add a new variable called an artificial variable. An <b>artificial variable</b> is a completely <b>fictitious variable,</b> a <b>temporary construct</b> used to <b>find an initial feasible solution</b> for the linear programming problem.<br><br>
  Taking the equation with x<sub>6</sub>, we can add the artificial variable x<sub>7</sub>:<br><br>
  <div align='center'>
    40x<sub>1</sub> + 10x<sub>2</sub> + 6x<sub>3</sub>- x<sub>6</sub> + x<sub>7</sub> = 32.5
  </div><br>
  Now, this equation became <b>canonical</b> as there is "<b>One decision variable</b> is <b>isolated</b> in each constraint with <b>a "+1" coefficient.</b>".<br><br>
  The difference between artificial and slack variables is that <b>slack variable have meaning in the problem formulation</b>, <b>artificial variables</b> have no significance; they are merely a <b>mathematical convenience</b> useful for <b>initiating the simplex algorithm.</b><br><br>
  Any solution with <b>artificial variable = 0</b> (x<sub>7</sub> = 0 in this case) is <b>feasible</b> for the original problem. We need a method to <b>penalize artifical variables,</b> to remove them from the program. We can use <b>phase 1-phase 2 procedure</b> and it works in two stages.
</div>

## 2.1.3 Phase 1-phase 2 procedure
<div align='justify'>
  Phase 1-phase 2 procedure is a method to penalize artificial variables. <b>Phase 1 determines a canonical form</b> for the problem by solving a <b>linear program related to the original problem</b> formulation. <b>Phase 2</b> starts with this canonical form to <b>solve the original problem.</b><br><br>
  In other words, phase 1 is to find any feasible corner point , then phase 2 starts from that corner point and finds the optimal solution.<br><br>
  Let us solve an example to better understand it.
</div>

### Example
<div align='justify'>
  Consider the following linear program:<br><br>
  <table align='center'>
    <tr align='center'>
      <td>
        <div align='center'>
          Maximize z = -3x<sub>1</sub> + 3x<sub>2</sub> + 2x<sub>3</sub> - 2x<sub>4</sub> - x<sub>5</sub> + 4x<sub>6</sub>,
        </div>
        <div align='left'>
          Subject to:
        </div>
        <div align='center'>
          x<sub>1</sub> - x<sub>2</sub> + x<sub>3</sub> - x<sub>4</sub> - 4x<sub>5</sub> + 2x<sub>6</sub> - x<sub>7</sub> + x<sub>9</sub> = 4 (Constraint 1),<br>
          -3x<sub>1</sub> + 3x<sub>2</sub> + x<sub>3</sub> - x<sub>4</sub> - 2x<sub>5</sub> + x<sub>8</sub> = 6 (Constraint 2),<br>
          -x<sub>3</sub> + x<sub>4</sub> + x<sub>6</sub> + x<sub>10</sub> = 1 (Constraint 3),<br>
          x<sub>1</sub> - x<sub>2</sub> + x<sub>3</sub> - x<sub>4</sub> - x<sub>5</sub> + x<sub>11</sub> = 0 (Constraint 4),<br>
          x<sub>j</sub> ≥ 0 (j = 1, 2, ..., 11).
        </div>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </table><br>
  Where <b>x<sub>8</sub></b> is a <b>slack variable</b>, while <b>x<sub>9</sub>, x<sub>10</sub>, x<sub>11</sub></b> are <b>artificial variables</b> added. The following fact will be useful:<br><br>
  <table>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <div align='center'>
          Any <b>feasible solution</b> to the <b>augmented system</b> with <i>artificial variables = 0</i> provides a <b>feasible solution</b> to the <b>original problem.</b><br><br>
          Conversely, any <b>feasible solution</b> to the <b>original problem</b> provides a <b>feasible solution</b> to the <b>augmented system</b> by <i>setting all artificial variables = 0</i>.
        </div>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </table><br>
  In simpler terms, it means that artificial variables <b>must be 0 in the final answer</b> to have a <b>feasible solution.</b> This can be done by either having them <b>leave the basis</b> (pivoting, changing from basic to nonbasic variable), or stay in basis but become value 0.<br><br>
  In <b>phase 1,</b> we will be solving the system with artificial variable, known as the augmented system. To <b>complete the canonical form of the phase 1</b> linear program, the basic variables from the phase 1 objective function have to be eliminated. In other words, the <b>artificial variables need to be set to 0.</b><br><br>
  This can be done by <b>maximizing w,</b> defined to be <b>minus the sum of artificial variables.</b><br><br>
  <div align='center'>
    -w - x<sub>9</sub> - x<sub>10</sub> - x<sub>11</sub> = 0,<br><br>
    <div align='left'>
      by making the artificial variables in constraint 1, 2, 3 as subject and substituting in here,
    </div><br>
    w = 2x<sub>1</sub> - 2x<sub>2</sub> + x<sub>3</sub> - x<sub>4</sub> - 5x<sub>5</sub> + 3x<sub>6</sub> - x<sub>7</sub> - 5<br><br>
  </div>
  As a result, maximizing w either:
  <ol>
    <li>
      gives <b>max w < 0</b><br>
    </li>
        The original problem is <b>infeasible</b> and the <b>optimization terminates</b>; or<br>
    <li>
      gives <b>max w = 0</b><br>
    </li>
        Then a <b>canonical form</b> has been <b>determined to initiate the original problem (phase 1 completed).</b> Apply the optimality, unboundedness, and improvement criteria to the original objective function z, starting with this canonical form <b>(start of phase 2).</b>
  </ol><br>
  In this example, after solving phase 1 with the simplex method, the equation:<br><br>
    <div align='center'>
      w = 0 = -x<sub>9</sub> - x<sub>10</sub> - x<sub>11</sub>
    </div><br>
  will be obtained, showing that the <b>solution is feasible,</b> so phase 1 is completed and phase 2 can start. <b>In the next unit, 2.3 Simplex method, we will be fully solving this example.</b>
</div>

## 2.1.4 Conclusion
<div align='justify'>
  In order to <b>reduce a general linear-programming problem</b> to canonical form, it is convenient to perform the necessary transformations <b>according to the following sequence:</b><br>
  <ol>
    <li>
      Replace each <b>decision variable unconsrtained in sign</b> by a <b>difference between two nonnegative variables.</b> This replacement applies to all equations including the objective function.
    </li><br>
    <table align='center'>
      <tr>
        <td>
          <div align='center'>
            let y<sub>1</sub> - y<sub>2</sub> = 3, but only y<sub>2</sub> ≥ 0<br>
            <div align='left'>
              Need to substitute:
            </div>
            y<sub>1</sub> = x<sub>1</sub> - x<sub>2</sub>, (this gives any real number y<sub>1</sub>)<br>
            y<sub>2</sub> = x<sub>3</sub>,<br>
            x<sub>j</sub> ≥ 0 (j = 1, 2, 3)
            <div align='left'>
              so now the equation becomes:
            </div>
            x<sub>1</sub> - x<sub>2</sub> - x<sub>3</sub> = 3
          </div>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </table><br>
    <li>
      <b>Change inequalities to equalities</b> by the introduction of <b>slack and surplus variables.</b>
    </li><br>
    <li>
      <b>Multiply equations</b> with a <b>negative righthand side coefficient by -1.</b>
    </li><br>
    <table align='center'>
      <tr>
        <td>
          <div align='center'>
            x<sub>3</sub> - x<sub>4</sub> - x<sub>6</sub> = -1, multiply whole constraint by -1<br>
            -x<sub>3</sub> + x<sub>4</sub> + x<sub>6</sub> = 1
          </div>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </table>
    <li>
      <b>Add a (nonnegative) artificial variable</b> to any equation that does not have an isolated variable readily apparent, and construct the phase 1 objective function.
    </li>
  </ol>
</div>
