# 2.3 Linear Programs with Bounded Variables
<div align='justify'>
  Notice that in all the previous examples, all the constraints were not bounded, meaning that the constraints were like:<br><br>
  <div align='center'>
    x ≥ constant or x ≤ constant
  </div><br>
  Now we will look at bounded constraints:<br><br>
  <div align='center'>
    constant<sub>1</sub> ≤ x ≤ constant<sub>2</sub><br>
  </div><br>
  These constrains can be <b>handled with simplex method,</b> with the addition of slack and surplus variables, which handles the bounding constraints <b>explicitly.</b> However, this method makes the problem <b>more complicated and larger than necessary,</b> due to the introduction of variables.<br><br>
  Instead, it is better if the bounded-variable constraints were considered implicitly. In this approach, <b>pivoting calculations</b> are <b>only computed</b> for <b>equality constraints.</b>
</div>

## 2.3.1 Bounded Variable Optimality Condition
<div align='justify'>
  Before learning how to solve using implicit method, let us look at when is optimal solution achieved when having bounded variables. Consider the following nonbasic variables x<sub>1</sub> and x<sub>2</sub> constrained by:<br>
  <div align='center'>
    4 ≤ x<sub>1</sub> ≤ 15<br>
    2 ≤ x<sub>2</sub> ≤ 5
  </div><br>
  and the objective function
  <div align='center'>
    max z = 4 - 0.25x<sub>1</sub> + 0.5x<sub>2</sub>
  </div><br>
  Consider the following 2 cases:<br><br>
  <ol>
    <li>
      <b>x<sub>1</sub></b> at lower bound <b>(LB)</b> and <b>x<sub>2</sub></b> at upper bound <b>(UB)</b>
    </li><br>
    max z = 4 - 0.25(4) + 0.5(5) = 5.5<br><br>
    <li>
      <b>x<sub>1</sub></b> at <b>UB</b> and <b>x<sub>2</sub></b> at <b>LB</b>
    </li><br>
    max z = 4 - 0.25(15) + 0.5(2) = 1.25
  </ol>
  We can see that when the <b>negative coefficient</b> is at <b>LB</b> and <b>positive coefficient</b> is at <b>UB</b>, this gives the <b>max Z</b>, which is the optimal solution.<br><br>
  Based on this, we can understand the following condition:<br><br>
  <table align='center'>
    <tr align='justify'>
      <td>
        <div align='center'>
          <b>Bounded Variable Optimality Condition</b><br><br>
        </div>
        In a <b>maximization problem</b> in <b>canonical form,</b> if <b>every nonbasic</b> variable at its <b>lower bound</b> has a <b>nonpositive (negative) objective coefficient,</b> and every nonbasic variable at its <b>upper bound</b> has a <b>nonnegative (positive) objective coefficient,</b> then the basic feasible solution given by that canonical form <b>maximizes the objective function</b> over the feasible region.
      </td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  One question might arise: What if the <b>positive objective coefficient</b> has <b>LB</b> and the <b>negative objective coefficient</b> has <b>UB?</b><br><br>
  <ul>
    <li>We simply <b>increase</b> the value at <b>LB</b> and <b>decrease the value of UB.</b></li>
  </ul>
</div>

## 2.3.2 Implicit method for bounded variables
